---
number: -1
path: '/lectures/d3'
date: '2019-01-29'
title: 'Wrap Up'
hidden: true
---

class: center, middle, block-text

# Lecture 15

## JavaScript: Wrap Up

---

class: center, middle, block-text

# D3 Micro-Lecture

## Working with data in JS

---

class: center, middle, block-text

# What is D3.js?

---

class: med

## Introduction to D3

D3 is **not** a data viz "framework"

D3 is a library for _data-driven document manipulation_ that exposes the full capabilities of html, css, and svg web standards

You can think of D3 almost like an extended jQuery in that both are DOM manipulation libraries, have CSS selectors, and are based on similar web standards that make them look similar

- in jQuery, you directly manipulate elements
- in D3, you provide data and callbacks through the provided API and D3 manipulates elements for you

---

class: med

## Why D3?

Unlike other libraries that introduce another abstraction layer for visual representation (like Processing, Raphael, or Protovis), D3’s vocabulary comes directly from HTML, SVG, and CSS standards. This means D3 has a steep learning curve, but it is incredibly powerful.

- You can implement all kinds of graphical effects like composite filter effects, dashed strokes, and clipping
- If browser vendors introduce new features tomorrow, you will be able to use them immediately.

Additionally, the community has been working towards developing reusable graphics components (ex: [ReactD3](http://www.reactd3.org), [DataMaps](http://datamaps.github.io)).

---

class: center, middle, block-text

# Fundamentals of D3

---

class: med

## Selections

Selections work similarly to jQuery

jQuery:

```js
$('.foo').find('.bar')
$('p').css('color', 'white')
```

D3:

```js
d3.selectAll('.foo').selectAll('.bar')
d3.selectAll('p').style('color', 'white')
```

D3 seems a bit verbose at first, but this is only because D3 and jQuery have very different use cases.

---

class: med-large

## Dynamic Properties

One very important feature of D3 is that styles, attributes, and properties can be specified as _functions of data_.

```js
d3.selectAll('p').style('width', function (d) {
  return d + 'px'
})
```

---

class: large

## Binding Data, Enter(), and Exit()

D3's power comes from giving you the ability to bind data to DOM elements. D3 will then dynamically update the DOM if the underlying data set changes.

- .data() to bind data to existing elements
- .enter() to generate new elements
- .exit() to remove unnecessary elements

[JSFiddle: Bar Charts](https://jsfiddle.net/grewp/s1g0yov0/7/)

---

class: med

## Cont. Binding Data, Enter(), and Exit()

A common pattern is to break the initial binding into update, enter, and exit

```js
// Update…
var p = d3
  .select('body')
  .selectAll('p')
  .data([4, 8, 15, 16, 23, 42])
  .text(function (d) {
    return d
  })

// Enter…
p.enter()
  .append('p')
  .text(function (d) {
    return d
  })

// Exit…
p.exit().remove()
```

For instance, if you're building a dynamic bar chart and you want the ability to add/remove categories to be visualized, you can simply change your data object and D3 will update your visualization accordingly.

---

class: med, smaller-code

## Chaining makes code cleaner!

Unchained:

```js
// create selection
var selection = d3.select('body').selectAll('div')
// create binding between selection and data
var binding = selection.data([50, 100, 150])
// update existing nodes
binding.style('width', function (d) {
  return d + 'px'
})
// create nodes for new data
binding
  .enter()
  .append('div')
  .style('width', function (d) {
    return d + 'px'
  })
```

Chained:

```js
d3.select(‘body’)
	.selectAll(“div”)
		.data([50, 100, 150]);
	.enter().append(“div”)
		.style(“width”, function(d) { return d + ‘px’; });
```

---

class: center, middle, block-text

# D3 Examples

---

class: med-large

# Examples

Be sure to check out the official [D3 Gallery](https://github.com/d3/d3/wiki/Gallery) on github, which has a ton of really cool projects that all have source code included.

The sky's the limit and there are so many features I can't even begin to cover:

- Loading 'real' data
- Transitions
- User interaction

---

class: center, middle, block-text

# What to do next...

## As a JavaScript developer

---

class: med-large

# What are your skills?

JavaScript is a language used at nearly every kind of company or startup in some way or the other.

If you're **building a website**, you know _HTML, CSS and jQuery_ and how to work with the _DOM_.

If you're **building a web app**, you know _Backbone, React and jQuery_ and how to send/receive information _via HTTP/WebSockets_.

If you're **building a server**, you know _Express and Socket.io_ and how to work with backing databases like _MongoDB_.

If you're **building a mobile app**, you know _React Native_.

If you're **building a chrome extension(?!)**, you know..._how to do that_.

---

class: center, middle, block-text

# **That's all folks!**
